Hello.
Welcome back to the course of Python programming.
Today we're going to learn about the if statement.
In fact we're going to learn much more we're going to learn about the if statement the statement that
Elif statement how to nest those statements and how to change those statements is going to be quite
an interesting to toil and don't worry even though sounds like a lot will get through all of it.
No problem.
All right so let's get straight into it.
We're going to take this to full screen mode.
There we go and let's save this work book or notebook as the if statement.
All right.
So what do I have over here.
Well what we're going to be doing is we're going to be generating random variables or random numbers
that are normally distributed and we're going to be checking where those random numbers fall so they
can either fall towards the left of 0 or towards the right of zero to the right of ones that can be
greater than 1 less than 1 in the grid and to less than 2 and so on.
So we're going to be using this as our guiding scale in terms of what's going on and we're going to
be using the F F L F and L statements to create the code that's going to help us determine where those
random numbers are falling is going to be quite exciting.
Tural a bit of stats going to be in-wall.
All right the first thing we need to do is we're going to need to import some pie and some pie is a
package for scientific computations or calculations in Python.
And usually it's imported as MP So basically we're importing some pie and we're doing it this alias
so it's shorter.
MP also by the way because we installed Python through Anaconda we already have an umpire and we can
just import like that.
If you install Python another way then you might not have it and you will need to first install this
package into onto your machine and then you'll be able to import it.
So we'll talk about how to install packages further down in the course so hopefully you already know
either how to install them or you followed along with the tutorials at the start so you are also using
Anaconda distribution.
All right so there we go.
Now let's say Braam and some PI dot random We need a specific function which is called Rand.
So once again Rand and we'll talk about how all of this works further down in this course.
But for now let's just use this because that will give us this function which will create these random
variables for us.
Let's run that.
And now what we can do is we can say Arend and and just brackets.
So once again we haven't spoken about functions and how they work but basically what this does is it
creates a random number which is part of a set of normally distributed numbers so if we run that you'll
see that there's a random number and that's normally just pure numbers that it's picking it out from
are normally distributed with a mean of zeros standard deviation of 1 so hence that number will always
be somewhere around zero it can be to the left to the right.
But as you go further away it is less and less likely to be further away.
So let's run this again.
And by the way if you want to run and just not go to the next line which will be doing quite a lot in
today's tutorial sort of pressing shift enter press control enter.
So like that you're staying on the same line as you can see it's generating and you number every time
.
So what we want to do is we want to now use this in our exploration of the if else and elif elif statements
Let's dive straight into it.
So I'm going to copy this bar up at the top because it's going to be handy for us.
And what are we going to do is we're going to create a variable we're going to say X equals around end
.
And so basically we're putting a random number into that Birbal and then what we want to do is we want
to check if x is greater than 1 we want to say.
We want to create a variable called answer and we want to say it is greater than 1 right.
And then we want to go here.
We want to print x.
So this is really not part of the of the if statement so this is the if statement.
This is after the if statement want to print X and we want to also print.
Answer.
So let's have a look at this card.
What did we just do.
So basically we're saying we know that our number falls somewhere over here we can actually be very
high or very low but most likely normally just with variables for some way here and even more likely
if they fall here even more likely they fold here and so the closer you get to zero the more likely
that that number is going to be there.
So we're checking is our number that we're generating here.
Did it happen to fall.
Did it happen to be greater than once or is it over here on this side.
So we're say if x is greater than 1 then we want to create a variable called answer.
We want to say greater than 1 and then we want to print X..
Just for verification purposes and we want to print the answer right.
So let's see what happens if we just run this code so you'll see here something strange happened.
First of all this is a number and it looks like X because we only have two prints so print x gave us
this number so our X is actually lying somewhere in here between 0 and 1.
So that means that this statement is false.
And this code does not get executed and therefore we get this error.
What does it say at the bottom name.
Answer is not defined.
That is correct because we've never created this variable answer.
At the very start we never created it and therefore we got this error.
So let's just run this code again I'm going to press control enter and let's wait until x is greater
than 1 and see what happens.
Then you add a second.
There we go.
So x is greater than 1.
And as you can see the variable answer was created.
It was set to greater 1 and then was X's printed and answers print.
So what happens if I run the line again now this s'elp what will happen is X has been generated to a
new number but answer is still the same why is that.
Well because answer is left over from the previous time around the cell.
And that means we need to get a read of answers so at the very start we are going to say answer equals
none.
And in Python a non is like a.
In other programming languages.
So basically what it does is here we're going to reset answer to none.
Let's try run this now so you can see that there it's none none none.
And now it's greater than 1 again.
And now it's not again.
All right so there you go.
That's a great example of around it using the if statement.
And it was so trivial that we actually didn't discuss how the if statement work so let's quickly go
through it.
So it's very similar to the While loop.
If you look at it so this is the keyword.
If then we've got the logical condition and then we've got the call on.
And after that we've got the executable code.
So if this condition is true then the code gets executed.
The only difference to the while loop is that it doesn't come back and recheck that just keeps going
.
So once it's executed one the python keeps going further down along the code.
So that's how the if statement works.
Now let's have a look at the next statement the else statement.
So we're actually going to copy all of this code put it in here and this time we're going to say here
we're going to say.
Else answer equals less than 1 right.
So basically what we're saying if x is greater than once if X is like Lizer a here then you should put
this value in to the variable answer else.
So in all other situations which essentially means that X is lying over here answer should be said to
the string less than 1 and then print x print answer.
Once again indentation helps you understand where each of these modules ends.
So let's run this and you can see that it's less than 1 so just visually compare that we are getting
the correct result here.
Yep does look correct.
Right.
So there's one less than 1.
Again less than one and you can just keep going and see what happens so they get greater than 1.
OK.
So that's that if Steven L. statements so so far so good they all make complete sense and they're very
very logical.
And what we're going to do now is we're going to copy this and we're going to look at the next step
up from there.
We're going to look at the nested statements.
So let's say nested statements.
So what are we going to be looking at.
Well first of all we already know we can distinguish if it's greater than 1 or less than or equal to
1.
Well now what we want to do is we want to find out three situations is it here greater than 1.
Is it less than minus 1 or is it between minus 1 and 1.
So it's probably the better way to raise it is is it greater is the variable greater than 1.
Is it between minus 1 and 1 or is it less than minus 1.
So let's try and do that where we have if x is greater than 1.
So that's the first part right.
And so now in the rest of the situations in this Else part which we got here in the rest of situations
we've got to break them down into two.
There is one situation where the variable happens to be here and the other situation when the variable
happens to be here.
So let's create a nother else if statement right.
So we don't need that.
We need to split it up into two here will say if x is greater than or equal to minus 1 then answer is
between minus 1 and 1 else.
Answer equals less than minus 1.
So let's have a look at what was going on here.
So this first part represents when x falls greater than 1 when x falls over here.
Right then this whole second part this big second part are presents when x falls over here and is broken
down into two bits.
So here if x is greater than minus 1.
So basically greater equal to than minus 1.
There we go.
It goes up to here then answers like that.
And then while we're still in here we've got this other bit this second subpart which presents all the
situations where an answer is less than minus 1.
I know it can be a bit confusing or quite quite cumbersome at the start when you look at it but it's
all quite logical it's just broken down into these nested if statements and hence that's what they are
called Neston statements.
So if we're on this line now let's give it a go.
You'll see that 0.3 4 is indeed between minus 1 and 1 was due to a few more tries.
There you go that's greater than 1.
Correct.
Let's have a look again.
Let's go straight and let's see if we can get a small one.
A less than minus 1.
That's great.
And one there's also greater than one.
There we go.
So minus one point ninety four is less than 1 so it is working correctly.
That's a great start.
And finally to answer this kind of concern that it is starting to look cumbersome.
Imagine if we wanted to nest more and more you could keep doing it but it would look more and more it
would be harder to read this type of code.
That's why we've got a different type of approach.
Let's create a new cell here and this one is going to be called chained statements.
Now often even experienced programmers get this wrong.
They think that what we're going to call chain statements is actually called nested That is not correct
but let's first create it to see what's going on.
So what we can do here is we can actually combine this else and this if into one operator which in other
programming languages is called else.
If in python like that or something got in Python is called elif.
So if we combine them we can just do that and move that back so I press shift tab there to move two
lines back.
So there we go.
So now we've got these three conditions and they're all nicely line by line under each other so if x
is greater than one then l f which is basically else if x is greater than mine or equal to then minus
1 so that means it's automatically up to here and then else it's less than minus 1.
It goes all the way here.
So as you can see these are chain statements.
A lot of the time programmers get them wrong and can call them nested nested is this.
This is chained.
And let's see how this works as run this as you can see greater than 1 between minus 1 and 1.
Again let's try get one.
There's another greater than 1 there go less than minus 1.
Great.
So again the result is the same but this is much neater much easier to code faster and easier to read
as well.
And that is how we create if and else if statements or if elif and else statements in Python.
It was quite a big tutorial.
Hope you were able to follow along and definitely give them some practice so that you can see all of
this in action and look for your next step.
Until then be coding